---
title: 'RUBIK Preliminary'
date: 2017-12-18
permalink: /posts/2017/12/18/blog-post/
excerpt: learning stuff as a networking research rookie
tags:
  - Rubik
---

Rookie training
------

Professor [Li Hao](http://gr.xjtu.edu.cn/web/hao.li) was framing a preliminary 
idea about creating an abstract frame to let user construct a customizable 
network stack processor laying on layer 2-4, inspired by mOS published at NSDI 
2017 conference. Since it is just a first thinking, prelim is required. And after 
a couple meeting with Li Hao, he asked me to work on programming a network processor
that can parser IP, TCP headers and be capable to handle IP fragmentations and TCP 
segments ordering. At that time I was a sophomore student and a rookie on networking area,
therefore learning IP, TCP protocol was exacting and programming stateful TCP 
protocol in C language was even suffering. However, after summer holiday, I finished my
own IP-TCP stack and from this implementation I became familiar with networking 
protocol and state machine model, which is a critical part in networking field.

naive goal
------

After I completed my IP-TCP stack, professor and I became confident that our goal 
to build a abstract framework to describe network was more viable. Therefore, 
professor Li and I start to think what is a good way to build this abstract. I came up
with the idea that a domain specific language may be a appoarch to this question. 
Thus, I followed IP-TCP stack, since IP and TCP protocols are widely deployed protcol, 
which definitely have virtue and advtanages, to design my very slapdash language
([click to view]({{ site.url }}/source_code/IP.html)). And in the mean time I programmed a python interpreter to actually 
compile this language to C code, which took me about a semester. To be honest, this 
script is very obscure and lack of elegance in term of visual aesthetic. However, 
when I finished my own language, though ugly, I built the model to adstract network 
protocol models, which is very crucial for our further research. In my first design, 
as you can see in my script, model describing networking protocol is composed of 
five parts. First, of course, is the name of the protocol. Second part is header 
format, which determines the composition of the header and is used for further 
reference. Third part is data, which carries the permanent data and temporary data.
Permanent data will be kept track of during a stream or connection's lifespan and 
temporary data is used in per packet scope and basically for temporary arithmetic 
use. The forth part is configuration, which includes settings for timer, hashtable, 
buffer management and so on. The fifth part is state machine part, which is the skeleton 
of networking protocol. For more details, [click here]({{ site.url }}/source_code/README.html) for a detailed description.

my sentiment of my first stage work on RUBIK
------

Doing research with Professor Li is my first time that, instead of studying 
knowledge, I actually design a brand new thing in my life. And it is quiet 
different than what I thought to be. First thing for a new design is that a idea 
is so intangible at the very begining that I was unconfident to do the experiment 
or implementation. At the first time, when professor Li Hao told me his idea about 
designing an abstract for networking protocol, what in my mind was totally a blank. 
Besides I was a newbie in computer networking area, I felt this idea is like a dream, 
it was so imaginative that I did not even know where should I start with. However, 
professor Li pointed me a very clear way to work on, which led me to build my own 
TCP/IP stack. Therefore as I had my basic knowledge about network, it became much 
easier to have my own abstract of network protocol in my brain. In retrospective, 
I realized that to make a idea tangible, the first thing I should do is to forget 
the exacting and time-consuming work to achieve my idea, but to focus on the basis 
of the idea. Aftering having built the cornerstone, I will acquire a much clearer 
thought about my idea, which may correct some mistakes in my naive idea, and form 
a much transparent roadmap for my further work about the idea.

Second, designing a abstract of networking protocol is much different with studying 
network protocol. The difference is not specified only in network study, but is 
the general differenece between design and knowledge acquisition. When I was studying 
IP-TCP protocol, What I did was to think why protocol need to be designed like this and 
what are constraints that compel designers to build protocols like this. However, 
when I was doing my own design or doing abstraction of networking protocol, it was 
so exacting that sometimes I would be stuck in one tiny syntax design or logic design 
for one or two day. 1) The first reason is the essence of design - I am doing something 
that nobody has done before. Therefore, everything I encountered was brand new. 
It was common that when I was designing a new syntax, there were two ways to accomplish. 
However, these two ways result in different consequences, which, since nobody encountered 
before and there is no ready formula or criterion to assess my choice, are very 
hard to choose. 2) The second reason is specific in designing new syntax - expressiveness. 
When I was designing my grammar, I always fell into dillima that I was oscillating between 
abstarction and flexibility, since the more abstraction I give to users, like 
syntax candy or high-level syntax to abstract meaningfull events or actions, the 
more users are suffered from the constraints of these high-level grammar and, on 
the contrary, the more flexibility I give to users, like bit-level manipulation, 
data structure manipulation or pointer operations, the less likely I design a new
grammar - what I designed is more like a encapsulation of C language.